<!--
  This file is autogenerated based on the src/schema.  DO NOT EDIT DIRECTLY.
  Follow https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#updating-the-schema
-->
# Appendix IX: Entities

This section compiles the entities (key-value pairs) described throughout this
specification, and describes each.

A general introduction to entities is given in the section on
[file name structure](../02-common-principles.md#file-name-structure).

The ordering of entities and whether it is allowed, OPTIONAL, or REQUIRED for
each is given in the [Entity Table](04-entity-table.md).

## sub

Full name: Subject

Format: `sub-<label>`

Definition: A person or animal participating in the study.

## ses

Full name: Session

Format: `ses-<label>`

Definition: A logical grouping of neuroimaging and behavioral data consistent across
subjects.
Session can (but doesn't have to) be synonymous to a visit in a
longitudinal study.
In general, subjects will stay in the scanner during one session.
However, for example, if a subject has to leave the scanner room and then
be re-positioned on the scanner bed, the set of MRI acquisitions will still
be considered as a session and match sessions acquired in other subjects.
Similarly, in situations where different data types are obtained over
several visits (for example fMRI on one day followed by DWI the day after)
those can be grouped in one session.
Defining multiple sessions is appropriate when several identical or similar
data acquisitions are planned and performed on all -or most- subjects,
often in the case of some intervention between sessions
(for example, training).

## task

Full name: Task

Format: `task-<label>`

Definition: Each task has a unique label that MUST only consist of letters and/or
numbers (other characters, including spaces and underscores, are not
allowed).
Those labels MUST be consistent across subjects and sessions.

## acq

Full name: Acquisition

Format: `acq-<label>`

Definition: The `acq-<label>` key/value pair corresponds to a custom label the
user MAY use to distinguish a different set of parameters used for
acquiring the same modality.
For example this should be used when a study includes two T1w images - one
full brain low resolution and and one restricted field of view but high
resolution.
In such case two files could have the following names:
`sub-01_acq-highres_T1w.nii.gz` and `sub-01_acq-lowres_T1w.nii.gz`, however
the user is free to choose any other label than highres and lowres as long
as they are consistent across subjects and sessions.
In case different sequences are used to record the same modality
(for example, RARE and FLASH for T1w)
this field can also be used to make that distinction.
At what level of detail to make the distinction (for example,
just between RARE and FLASH, or between RARE, FLASH, and FLASHsubsampled)
remains at the discretion of the researcher.

## ce

Full name: Contrast Enhancing Agent

Format: `ce-<label>`

Definition: The `ce-<label>` key/value can be used to distinguish
sequences using different contrast enhanced images.
The label is the name of the contrast agent.
The key `ContrastBolusIngredient` MAY be also be added in the JSON file,
with the same label.

## rec

Full name: Reconstruction

Format: `rec-<label>`

Definition: The `rec-<label>` key/value can be used to distinguish
different reconstruction algorithms (for example ones using motion
correction).

## dir

Full name: Phase-Encoding Direction

Format: `dir-<label>`

Definition: The `dir-<label>` key/value can be set to an arbitrary alphanumeric label
(for example, `dir-LR` or `dir-AP`) to distinguish different phase-encoding
directions.

## run

Full name: Run

Format: `run-<index>`

Definition: If several scans of the same modality are acquired they MUST be indexed
with a key-value pair: `_run-1`, `_run-2`, ..., `_run-<index>`
(only nonnegative integers are allowed for the `<index>`).
When there is only one scan of a given type the run key MAY be omitted.

## mod

Full name: Corresponding Modality

Format: `mod-<label>`

Definition: The `mod-<label>` key/value pair corresponds to modality label for defacing
masks, for example, T1w, inplaneT1, referenced by a defacemask image.
For example, `sub-01_mod-T1w_defacemask.nii.gz`.

## echo

Full name: Echo

Format: `echo-<index>`

Definition: If files belonging to an entity-linked file collection are acquired at different
echo times, the `_echo-<index>` key/value pair MUST be used to distinguish
individual files.
This entity represents the `EchoTime` metadata field. Please note that the `<index>`
denotes the number/index (in the form of a nonnegative integer), not the
`EchoTime` value which needs to be stored in the field `EchoTime` of the separate
JSON file.

## flip

Full name: Flip Angle

Format: `flip-<index>`

Definition: If files belonging to an entity-linked file collection are acquired at different
flip angles, the `_flip-<index>` key/value pair MUST be used to distinguish
individual files.
This entity represents the `FlipAngle` metadata field. Please note that the `<index>`
denotes the number/index (in the form of a nonnegative integer), not the `FlipAngle`
value which needs to be stored in the field `FlipAngle` of the separate JSON file.

## inv

Full name: Inversion Time

Format: `inv-<index>`

Definition: If files belonging to an entity-linked file collection are acquired at different
inversion times, the `_inv-<index>` key/value pair MUST be used to distinguish
individual files.
This entity represents the `InversionTime` metadata field. Please note that the `<index>`
denotes the number/index (in the form of a nonnegative integer), not the `InversionTime`
value which needs to be stored in the field `InversionTime` of the separate JSON file.

## mt

Full name: Magnetization Transfer

Format: `mt-<label>`

Definition: If files belonging to an entity-linked file collection are acquired at different
magnetization transfer (MT) states, the `_mt-<label>` key/value pair MUST be used to
distinguish individual files.
This entity represents the `MTState` metadata field. Allowed label values for this
entity are `on` and `off`, for images acquired in presence and absence of an MT pulse,
respectively.

## part

Full name: Part

Format: `part-<label>`

Definition: This entity is used to indicate which component of the complex
representation of the MRI signal is represented in voxel data.
The `part-<label>` key/value pair is associated with the DICOM tag
`0008,9208`.
Allowed label values for this entity are `phase`, `mag`, `real` and `imag`,
which are typically used in `part-mag`/`part-phase` or
`part-real`/`part-imag` pairs of files.

Phase images MAY be in radians or in arbitrary units.
The sidecar JSON file MUST include the units of the `phase` image.
The possible options are `rad` or `arbitrary`.

When there is only a magnitude image of a given type, the `part` key MAY be
omitted.

## recording

Full name: Recording

Format: `recording-<label>`

Definition: More than one continuous recording file can be included (with different
sampling frequencies).
In such case use different labels.
For example: `_recording-contrast`, `_recording-saturation`.

## proc

Full name: Processed (on device)

Format: `proc-<label>`

Definition: The proc label is analogous to rec for MR and denotes a variant of a file
that was a result of particular processing performed on the device.
This is useful for files produced in particular by Elekta’s MaxFilter
(for example, sss, tsss, trans, quat or mc),
which some installations impose to be run on raw data because of active
shielding software corrections before the MEG data can actually be
exploited.

## space

Full name: Space

Format: `space-<label>`

Definition: The space entity can be used to indicate
the way in which electrode positions are interpreted
(for EEG/MEG/iEEG data) or
the spatial reference to which a file has been aligned (for MRI data).
The space label needs to be taken from the list in Appendix VIII.

For EEG/MEG/iEEG data, this entity can be applied to raw data, but
for other data types, it is restricted to derivative data.

## split

Full name: Split

Format: `split-<index>`

Definition: In the case of long data recordings that exceed a file size of 2Gb, the
.fif files are conventionally split into multiple parts.
Each of these files has an internal pointer to the next file.
This is important when renaming these split recordings to the BIDS
convention.

Instead of a simple renaming, files should be read in and saved under their
new names with dedicated tools like MNE, which will ensure that not only
the file names, but also the internal file pointers will be updated.
It is RECOMMENDED that .fif files with multiple parts use the
`split-<index>` entity to indicate each part.

## res

Full name: Resolution

Format: `res-<label>`

Definition: Resolution of regularly sampled N-dimensional data.
MUST have a corresponding `Resolution` metadata field to provide
interpretation.

This entity is only applicable to derivative data.

## den

Full name: Density

Format: `den-<label>`

Definition: Density of non-parametric surfaces.
MUST have a corresponding `Density` metadata field to provide
interpretation.

This entity is only applicable to derivative data.

## label

Full name: Label

Format: `label-<label>`

Definition: Tissue-type label, following a prescribed vocabulary.
Applies to binary masks and probabilistic/partial volume segmentations
that describe a single tissue type.

This entity is only applicable to derivative data.

## desc

Full name: Description

Format: `desc-<label>`

Definition: When necessary to distinguish two files that do not otherwise have a
distinguishing entity, the `_desc-<label>` keyword-value SHOULD be used.

This entity is only applicable to derivative data.
